docs-master/Installation.md, before:

# Installation

First, add Watermelon to your project:

```bash
yarn add @nozbe/watermelondb
yarn add @nozbe/with-observables
```
or alternatively if you prefer npm:

```npm
npm install @nozbe/watermelondb
npm install @nozbe/with-observables
```

## React Native setup

1. Install the Babel plugin for decorators if you haven't already:
    ```bash
    yarn add --dev @babel/plugin-proposal-decorators
    ```
    or

    ```bash
    npm install -D @babel/plugin-proposal-decorators

2. Add ES6 decorators support to your `.babelrc` file:
    ```json
    {
      "presets": ["module:metro-react-native-babel-preset"],
      "plugins": [
        ["@babel/plugin-proposal-decorators", { "legacy": true }]
      ]
    }
    ```
3. Set up your iOS or Android project — see instructions below

### iOS (React Native)

1. **Set up Babel config in your project**

   See instructions above ⬆️

2. **Add Swift support to your Xcode project**:
   - Open `ios/YourAppName.xcodeproj` in Xcode
   - Right-click on **Your App Name** in the Project Navigator on the left, and click **New File…**
   - Create a single empty `Swift` file to the project (make sure that **Your App Name** target is selected when adding), and when Xcode asks, press **Create Bridging Header** and **do not remove `Swift`** file then.

3. **Link WatermelonDB's native library with the Xcode project**:

    You can link WatermelonDB manually or using CocoaPods:

      - **Manually**

         1. Open your project in Xcode, right click on **Libraries** in the Project Navigator on the left and click **Add Files to "Your Project Name"**. Look under `node_modules/@nozbe/watermelondb/native/ios` and select `WatermelonDB.xcodeproj`
         2. Go to Project settings (top item in the Project navigator on the left), select your app name under **Targets** → **Build Phases** → **Link Binary With Libraries**, and add `libWatermelonDB.a`

         For more information about linking libraries manually, [see React Native documentation](https://facebook.github.io/react-native/docs/linking-libraries-ios).

      - **Link WatermelonDB's native library with the Xcode project -- using CocoaPods**:

          1. Add this to your CocoaPods (might not be needed if you're using autolinking):

              ```ruby
              pod 'WatermelonDB', :path => '../node_modules/@nozbe/watermelondb'
              ```
          2. Unfortunately, the build will fail due to an issue with React Native's Pods, so you need to modify this line:

              ```ruby
              # Before:
              pod 'React-jsi', :path => '../node_modules/react-native/ReactCommon/jsi'
              # Change to:
              pod 'React-jsi', :path => '../node_modules/react-native/ReactCommon/jsi', :modular_headers => true
              ```

      Note that Xcode 9.4 and a deployment target of at least iOS 9.0 is required (although Xcode 11.5+ and iOS 12.0+ are recommended).

### Android (React Native)

1. **Set up Babel config in your project**

   See instructions above ⬆️

2. In `android/settings.gradle`, add:

   ```gradle
   include ':watermelondb'
   project(':watermelondb').projectDir =
       new File(rootProject.projectDir, '../node_modules/@nozbe/watermelondb/native/android')
   ```
3. In `android/app/build.gradle`, add:
   ```gradle
   apply plugin: "com.android.application"
   apply plugin: 'kotlin-android'  // ⬅️ This!
   // ...
   dependencies {
       // ...
       implementation project(':watermelondb')  // ⬅️ This!
   }
   ```
4. In `android/build.gradle`, add Kotlin support to the project:
   ```gradle
   buildscript {
       ext.kotlin_version = '1.3.21'
       // ...
       dependencies {
           // ...
           classpath "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-gradle-plugin:$kotlin_version"
       }
   }
   ```
5. And finally, in `android/app/src/main/java/{YOUR_APP_PACKAGE}/MainApplication.java`, add:
   ```java
   // ...
   import com.nozbe.watermelondb.WatermelonDBPackage; // ⬅️ This!
   // ...
   @Override
   protected List<ReactPackage> getPackages() {
     return Arrays.<ReactPackage>asList(
       new MainReactPackage(),
       new WatermelonDBPackage() // ⬅️ Here!
     );
   }
   ```
6. **Troubleshooting**. If you get this error:
    > `Can't find variable: Symbol`

    You might need a polyfill for ES6 Symbol:

    ```bash
    yarn add es6-symbol
    ```

    And in your `index.js`:

    ```bash
    import 'es6-symbol/implement'
    ```

    Alternatively, we also recommend [`jsc-android`](https://github.com/react-community/jsc-android-buildscripts), with which you don't need this polyfill, and it also makes your app faster.

## Web setup

This guide assumes you use Webpack as your bundler.

3. If you haven't already, install Babel plugins for decorators, static class properties, and async/await to get the most out of Watermelon. This assumes you use Babel 7 and already support ES6 syntax.
    ```bash
    yarn add --dev @babel/plugin-proposal-decorators
    yarn add --dev @babel/plugin-proposal-class-properties
    yarn add --dev @babel/plugin-transform-runtime
    ```
    or
    ```bash
    npm install -D @babel/plugin-proposal-decorators
    npm install -D @babel/plugin-proposal-class-properties
    npm install -D @babel/plugin-transform-runtime
    ```
4. Add ES7 support to your `.babelrc` file:
    ```json
    {
      "plugins": [
        ["@babel/plugin-proposal-decorators", { "legacy": true }],
        ["@babel/plugin-proposal-class-properties", { "loose": true }],
        [
          "@babel/plugin-transform-runtime",
           {
             "helpers": true,
             "regenerator": true
           }
        ]
      ]
    }
    ```

If you want to use Web Worker for WatermelonDB (this has pros and cons, we recommend you start without Web Workers, and evaluate later if it makes sense for your app to use them):

1. Install [worker-loader](https://github.com/webpack-contrib/worker-loader) Webpack plugin to add support for Web Workers to your app:
    ```sh
    yarn add --dev worker-loader
    ```
    or

    ```bash
    npm install -D worker-loader
    ```

2. And add this to Webpack configuration:
    ```js
    // webpack.config.js
    {
      module: {
        rules: [
          // ⬇️ Add this:
          {
            test: /\.worker\.js$/,
            use: { loader: 'worker-loader' }
          }
        ]
      },
      // ...
      output: {
        // ...
        globalObject: 'this', // ⬅️ And this
      }
    }
    ```

## Set up `Database`

Create `model/schema.js` in your project:

```js
import { appSchema, tableSchema } from '@nozbe/watermelondb'

export default appSchema({
  version: 1,
  tables: [
    // tableSchemas go here...
  ]
})
```

You'll need it for [the next step](./Schema.md). Now, in your `index.js`:

```js
import { Database } from '@nozbe/watermelondb'
import SQLiteAdapter from '@nozbe/watermelondb/adapters/sqlite'

import schema from './model/schema'
// import Post from './model/Post' // ⬅️ You'll import your Models here

// First, create the adapter to the underlying database:
const adapter = new SQLiteAdapter({
  schema,
  // dbName: 'myapp', // optional database name or file system path
  // migrations, // optional migrations
  synchronous: true, // synchronous mode only works on iOS. improves performance and reduces glitches in most cases, but also has some downsides - test with and without it
  // experimentalUseJSI: true, // experimental JSI mode, use only if you're brave
})

// Then, make a Watermelon database from it!
const database = new Database({
  adapter,
  modelClasses: [
    // Post, // ⬅️ You'll add Models to Watermelon here
  ],
  actionsEnabled: true,
})
```

The above will work on iOS and Android (React Native). For the web, instead of `SQLiteAdapter` use `LokiJSAdapter`:

```js
import LokiJSAdapter from '@nozbe/watermelondb/adapters/lokijs'

const adapter = new LokiJSAdapter({
  schema,
  // migrations, // optional migrations
  useWebWorker: false, // recommended for new projects. tends to improve performance and reduce glitches in most cases, but also has downsides - test with and without it
  useIncrementalIndexedDB: true, // recommended for new projects. improves performance (but incompatible with early Watermelon databases)
  // dbName: 'myapp', // optional db name
  // It's recommended you implement this method:
  // onIndexedDBVersionChange: () => {
  //   // database was deleted in another browser tab (user logged out), so we must make sure we delete
  //   // it in this tab as well
  //   if (checkIfUserIsLoggedIn()) {
  //     window.location.reload()
  //   }
  // },
  // Optional:
  // onQuotaExceededError: (error) => { /* do something when user runs out of disk space */ },
})

// The rest is the same!
```

* * *

## Next steps

➡️ After Watermelon is installed, [**define your app's schema**](./Schema.md)

Commit message:

sqlite - node: addresses PR changes ( peer dependency + docs)

docs-master/Installation.md, after:

# Installation

First, add Watermelon to your project:

```bash
yarn add @nozbe/watermelondb
yarn add @nozbe/with-observables
```
or alternatively if you prefer npm:

```npm
npm install @nozbe/watermelondb
npm install @nozbe/with-observables
```

## React Native setup

1. Install the Babel plugin for decorators if you haven't already:
    ```bash
    yarn add --dev @babel/plugin-proposal-decorators
    ```
    or

    ```bash
    npm install -D @babel/plugin-proposal-decorators

2. Add ES6 decorators support to your `.babelrc` file:
    ```json
    {
      "presets": ["module:metro-react-native-babel-preset"],
      "plugins": [
        ["@babel/plugin-proposal-decorators", { "legacy": true }]
      ]
    }
    ```
3. Set up your iOS or Android project — see instructions below

### iOS (React Native)

1. **Set up Babel config in your project**

   See instructions above ⬆️

2. **Add Swift support to your Xcode project**:
   - Open `ios/YourAppName.xcodeproj` in Xcode
   - Right-click on **Your App Name** in the Project Navigator on the left, and click **New File…**
   - Create a single empty `Swift` file to the project (make sure that **Your App Name** target is selected when adding), and when Xcode asks, press **Create Bridging Header** and **do not remove `Swift`** file then.

3. **Link WatermelonDB's native library with the Xcode project**:

    You can link WatermelonDB manually or using CocoaPods:

      - **Manually**

         1. Open your project in Xcode, right click on **Libraries** in the Project Navigator on the left and click **Add Files to "Your Project Name"**. Look under `node_modules/@nozbe/watermelondb/native/ios` and select `WatermelonDB.xcodeproj`
         2. Go to Project settings (top item in the Project navigator on the left), select your app name under **Targets** → **Build Phases** → **Link Binary With Libraries**, and add `libWatermelonDB.a`

         For more information about linking libraries manually, [see React Native documentation](https://facebook.github.io/react-native/docs/linking-libraries-ios).

      - **Link WatermelonDB's native library with the Xcode project -- using CocoaPods**:

          1. Add this to your CocoaPods (might not be needed if you're using autolinking):

              ```ruby
              pod 'WatermelonDB', :path => '../node_modules/@nozbe/watermelondb'
              ```
          2. Unfortunately, the build will fail due to an issue with React Native's Pods, so you need to modify this line:

              ```ruby
              # Before:
              pod 'React-jsi', :path => '../node_modules/react-native/ReactCommon/jsi'
              # Change to:
              pod 'React-jsi', :path => '../node_modules/react-native/ReactCommon/jsi', :modular_headers => true
              ```

      Note that Xcode 9.4 and a deployment target of at least iOS 9.0 is required (although Xcode 11.5+ and iOS 12.0+ are recommended).

### Android (React Native)

1. **Set up Babel config in your project**

   See instructions above ⬆️

2. In `android/settings.gradle`, add:

   ```gradle
   include ':watermelondb'
   project(':watermelondb').projectDir =
       new File(rootProject.projectDir, '../node_modules/@nozbe/watermelondb/native/android')
   ```
3. In `android/app/build.gradle`, add:
   ```gradle
   apply plugin: "com.android.application"
   apply plugin: 'kotlin-android'  // ⬅️ This!
   // ...
   dependencies {
       // ...
       implementation project(':watermelondb')  // ⬅️ This!
   }
   ```
4. In `android/build.gradle`, add Kotlin support to the project:
   ```gradle
   buildscript {
       ext.kotlin_version = '1.3.21'
       // ...
       dependencies {
           // ...
           classpath "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-gradle-plugin:$kotlin_version"
       }
   }
   ```
5. And finally, in `android/app/src/main/java/{YOUR_APP_PACKAGE}/MainApplication.java`, add:
   ```java
   // ...
   import com.nozbe.watermelondb.WatermelonDBPackage; // ⬅️ This!
   // ...
   @Override
   protected List<ReactPackage> getPackages() {
     return Arrays.<ReactPackage>asList(
       new MainReactPackage(),
       new WatermelonDBPackage() // ⬅️ Here!
     );
   }
   ```
6. **Troubleshooting**. If you get this error:
    > `Can't find variable: Symbol`

    You might need a polyfill for ES6 Symbol:

    ```bash
    yarn add es6-symbol
    ```

    And in your `index.js`:

    ```bash
    import 'es6-symbol/implement'
    ```

    Alternatively, we also recommend [`jsc-android`](https://github.com/react-community/jsc-android-buildscripts), with which you don't need this polyfill, and it also makes your app faster.


## NodeJS setup

1. Install [better-sqlite3](https://github.com/JoshuaWise/better-sqlite3) peer dependency
    ```sh
    yarn add --dev better-sqlite3
    ```
    or

    ```bash
    npm install -D better-sqlite3
    ```

## Web setup

This guide assumes you use Webpack as your bundler.

3. If you haven't already, install Babel plugins for decorators, static class properties, and async/await to get the most out of Watermelon. This assumes you use Babel 7 and already support ES6 syntax.
    ```bash
    yarn add --dev @babel/plugin-proposal-decorators
    yarn add --dev @babel/plugin-proposal-class-properties
    yarn add --dev @babel/plugin-transform-runtime
    ```
    or
    ```bash
    npm install -D @babel/plugin-proposal-decorators
    npm install -D @babel/plugin-proposal-class-properties
    npm install -D @babel/plugin-transform-runtime
    ```
4. Add ES7 support to your `.babelrc` file:
    ```json
    {
      "plugins": [
        ["@babel/plugin-proposal-decorators", { "legacy": true }],
        ["@babel/plugin-proposal-class-properties", { "loose": true }],
        [
          "@babel/plugin-transform-runtime",
           {
             "helpers": true,
             "regenerator": true
           }
        ]
      ]
    }
    ```

If you want to use Web Worker for WatermelonDB (this has pros and cons, we recommend you start without Web Workers, and evaluate later if it makes sense for your app to use them):

1. Install [worker-loader](https://github.com/webpack-contrib/worker-loader) Webpack plugin to add support for Web Workers to your app:
    ```sh
    yarn add --dev worker-loader
    ```
    or

    ```bash
    npm install -D worker-loader
    ```

2. And add this to Webpack configuration:
    ```js
    // webpack.config.js
    {
      module: {
        rules: [
          // ⬇️ Add this:
          {
            test: /\.worker\.js$/,
            use: { loader: 'worker-loader' }
          }
        ]
      },
      // ...
      output: {
        // ...
        globalObject: 'this', // ⬅️ And this
      }
    }
    ```

## Set up `Database`

Create `model/schema.js` in your project:

```js
import { appSchema, tableSchema } from '@nozbe/watermelondb'

export default appSchema({
  version: 1,
  tables: [
    // tableSchemas go here...
  ]
})
```

You'll need it for [the next step](./Schema.md). Now, in your `index.js`:

```js
import { Database } from '@nozbe/watermelondb'
import SQLiteAdapter from '@nozbe/watermelondb/adapters/sqlite'

import schema from './model/schema'
// import Post from './model/Post' // ⬅️ You'll import your Models here

// First, create the adapter to the underlying database:
const adapter = new SQLiteAdapter({
  schema,
  // dbName: 'myapp', // optional database name or file system path
  // migrations, // optional migrations
  synchronous: true, // synchronous mode only works on iOS. improves performance and reduces glitches in most cases, but also has some downsides - test with and without it
  // experimentalUseJSI: true, // experimental JSI mode, use only if you're brave
})

// Then, make a Watermelon database from it!
const database = new Database({
  adapter,
  modelClasses: [
    // Post, // ⬅️ You'll add Models to Watermelon here
  ],
  actionsEnabled: true,
})
```

The above will work on React Native (iOS/Android) and NodeJS. For the web, instead of `SQLiteAdapter` use `LokiJSAdapter`:

```js
import LokiJSAdapter from '@nozbe/watermelondb/adapters/lokijs'

const adapter = new LokiJSAdapter({
  schema,
  // migrations, // optional migrations
  useWebWorker: false, // recommended for new projects. tends to improve performance and reduce glitches in most cases, but also has downsides - test with and without it
  useIncrementalIndexedDB: true, // recommended for new projects. improves performance (but incompatible with early Watermelon databases)
  // dbName: 'myapp', // optional db name
  // It's recommended you implement this method:
  // onIndexedDBVersionChange: () => {
  //   // database was deleted in another browser tab (user logged out), so we must make sure we delete
  //   // it in this tab as well
  //   if (checkIfUserIsLoggedIn()) {
  //     window.location.reload()
  //   }
  // },
  // Optional:
  // onQuotaExceededError: (error) => { /* do something when user runs out of disk space */ },
})

// The rest is the same!
```

* * *

## Next steps

➡️ After Watermelon is installed, [**define your app's schema**](./Schema.md)
