docs-master/Query.md, before:

# Query API

**Querying** is how you find records that match certain conditions, for example:

- Find all comments that belong to a certain post
- Find all _verified_ comments made by John
- Count all verified comments made by John or Lucy published under posts made in the last two weeks

Because queries are executed on the database, and not in JavaScript, they're really fast. It's also how Watermelon can be fast even at large scales, because even with tens of thousands of records _total_, you rarely need to load more than a few dozen records at app launch.

## Defining Queries

### @children

The simplest query is made using `@children`. This defines a `Query` for all comments that belong to a `Post`:

```js
class Post extends Model {
  // ...
  @children('comments') comments
}
```

**➡️ Learn more:** [Defining Models](./Model.md)

### Extended Query

To **narrow down** a `Query` (add [extra conditions](#query-conditions) to an existing Query), use `.extend()`:

```js
import { children, lazy } from '@nozbe/watermelondb/decorators'

class Post extends Model {
  // ...
  @children('comments') comments
  @lazy verifiedComments = this.comments.extend(Q.where('is_verified', true))
  @lazy verifiedAwesomeComments = this.verifiedComments.extend(Q.where('is_awesome', true))
}
```

**Note:** Use the `@lazy` when extending or defining new Queries for performance

### Custom Queries

You can query any table using `this.collections.get(tableName).query(conditions)`. Here, `post.comments` will query all users that made a comment under `post`.

```js
class Post extends Model {
  // ...
  @lazy commenters = this.collections.get('users').query(
    Q.on('comments', 'post_id', this.id)
  )
}
```

## Executing Queries

Most of the time, you [connect Queries to Components](./Components.md) by using `observe` or `observeCount`:

```js
withObservables(['post'], ({ post }) => ({
  post: post.observe(),
  comments: post.comments.observe(),
  verifiedCommentCount: post.verifiedComments.observeCount(),
}))
```

#### Fetch

To simply get the current list or current count, use `fetch` / `fetchCount`. You might need it [in Actions](./Actions.md).

```js
const comments = await post.comments.fetch()
const verifiedCommentCount = await post.verifiedComments.fetchCount()

// Shortcut syntax:
const comments = await post.comments
const verifiedCommentCount = await post.verifiedComments.count
```

## Query conditions

```js
import { Q } from '@nozbe/watermelondb'
// ...
commentCollection.query(
  Q.where('is_verified', true)
)
```

This will query **all** comments that are verified (all comments with one condition: the `is_verified` column of a comment must be `true`).

When making conditions, you refer to [**column names**](./Schema.md) of a table (i.e. `is_verified`, not `isVerified`). This is because queries are executed directly on the underlying database.

The second argument is the value we want to query for. Note that the passed argument must be the same type as the column (`string`, `number`, or `boolean`; `null` is allowed only if the column is marked as `isOptional: true` in the schema).

#### Empty query

```js
const allComments = await commentCollection.query().fetch()
```

A Query with no conditions will find **all** records in the collection.

**Note:** Don't do this unless necessary. It's generally more efficient to only query the exact records you need.

#### Multiple conditions

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.where('is_verified', true),
  Q.where('is_awesome', true)
)
```

This queries all comments that are **both** verified **and** awesome.

### Conditions with other operators

| Query | JavaScript equivalent |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| `Q.where('is_verified', true)` | `is_verified === true` (shortcut syntax) |
| `Q.where('is_verified', Q.eq(true))` | `is_verified === true` |
| `Q.where('archived_at', Q.notEq(null))` | `archived_at !== null` |
| `Q.where('likes', Q.gt(0))` | `likes > 0`  |
| `Q.where('likes', Q.weakGt(0))` | `likes > 0` (slightly different semantics — [see "null behavior"](#null-behavior) for details) |
| `Q.where('likes', Q.gte(100))` | `likes >= 100` |
| `Q.where('dislikes', Q.lt(100))` | `dislikes < 100` |
| `Q.where('dislikes', Q.lte(100))` | `dislikes <= 100` |
| `Q.where('likes', Q.between(10, 100))` | `likes >= 10 && likes <= 100` |
| `Q.where('status', Q.oneOf(['published', 'draft']))` | `status === 'published' \|\| status === 'draft'` |
| `Q.where('status', Q.notIn(['archived', 'deleted']))` | `status !== 'archived' && status !== 'deleted'` |
| `Q.where('status', Q.like('%bl_sh%'))` | `/.*bl.sh.*/i` (See note below!) |
| `Q.where('status', Q.notLike('%bl_sh%'))` | `/^((!?.*bl.sh.*).)*$/i` (Inverse regex match) (See note below!) |

**Note:** It's NOT SAFE to use `Q.like` and `Q.notLike` with user input directly, because special characters like `%` or `_` are not escaped. Always sanitize user input like so:
```js
Q.like(`%${Q.sanitizeLikeString(userInput)}%`)
Q.notLike(`%${Q.sanitizeLikeString(userInput)}%`)
```

You can use `Q.like` for search-related tasks. For example, to find all users whose username start with "jas" (case-insensitive) you can write

```js
usersCollection.query(
  Q.where("username", Q.like(`${Q.sanitizeLikeString("jas")}%`)
)
```

where `"jas"` can be changed dynamically with user input.

### AND/OR nesting

You can nest multiple conditions using `Q.and` and `Q.or`:

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.where('archived_at', Q.notEq(null)),
  Q.or(
    Q.where('is_verified', true),
    Q.and(
      Q.where('likes', Q.gt(10)),
      Q.where('dislikes', Q.lt(5))
    )
  )
)
```

This is equivalent to `archivedAt !== null && (isVerified || (likes > 10 && dislikes < 5))`.

### Conditions on related tables ("JOIN queries")

For example: query all comments under posts published by John:

```js
// Shortcut syntax:
commentCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', 'author_id', john.id),
)

// Full syntax:
commentCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', Q.where('author_id', john.id)),
)
```

Normally you set conditions on the table you're querying. Here we're querying **comments**, but we have a condition on the **post** the comment belongs to.

The first argument for `Q.on` is the table name you're making a condition on. The other two arguments are same as for `Q.where`.

**Note:** The two tables [must be associated](./Model.md) before you can use `Q.on`.

#### Multiple conditions on a related table

For example: query all comments under posts that are written by John *and* are either published or belong to `draftBlog`

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', [
    Q.where('author_id', john.id)
    Q.or(
      Q.where('published', true),
      Q.where('blog_id', draftBlog.id),
    )
  ]),
)
```

Instead of an array of conditions, you can also pass `Q.and`, `Q.or`, `Q.where`, or `Q.on` as the second argument to `Q.on`.

#### Nesting `Q.on` within AND/OR

If you want to place `Q.on` nested within `Q.and` and `Q.or`, you must explicitly define all tables you're joining on. (NOTE: The `Q.experimentalJoinTables` API is subject to change)

```js
tasksCollection.query(
  Q.experimentalJoinTables(['projects']),
  Q.or(
    Q.where('is_followed', true),
    Q.on('projects', 'is_followed', true),
  ),
)
```

Known limitation: column comparisons do not work within nested `Q.on`s on LokiJSAdapter

#### Deep `Q.on`s

You can also nest `Q.on` within `Q.on`, e.g. to make a condition on a grandparent. You must explicitly define the tables you're joining on. (NOTE: The `Q.experimentalNestedJoin` API is subject to change). Multiple levels of nesting are allowed.

```js
// this queries tasks that are inside projects that are inside teams where team.foo == 'bar'
tasksCollection.query(
  Q.experimentalNestedJoin('projects', 'teams'),
  Q.on('projects', Q.on('teams', 'foo', 'bar')),
)
```

## Advanced Queries

### Advanced observing

Call `query.observeWithColumns(['foo', 'bar'])` to create an Observable that emits a value not only when the list of matching records changes (new records/deleted records), but also when any of the matched records changes its `foo` or `bar` column. [Use this for observing sorted lists](./Components.md)

#### Count throttling

By default, calling `query.observeCount()` returns an Observable that is throttled to emit at most once every 250ms. You can disable throttling using `query.observeCount(false)`.

### Column comparisons

This queries comments that have more likes than dislikes. Note that we're comparing `likes` column to another column instead of a value.

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.where('likes', Q.gt(Q.column('dislikes')))
)
```

### sortBy, take, skip

When using SQLite adapter, you can use these *experimental* clauses to sort the result of the query and to limit the number of results

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.experimentalSortBy('likes', Q.asc), // sorts ascending by `likes`
  Q.experimentalSkip(100),
  Q.experimentalTake(100),
)
```

**NOTE**: This does not currently work on web/LokiJS (please contribute!), and causes query observation to fall back to a less efficient method. We recommend using sortBy only when you absolutely need to limit queries, otherwise, it may be better to sort in JavaScript.

### Security

Remember that Queries are a sensitive subject, security-wise. Never trust user input and pass it directly into queries. In particular:

- Never pass into queries values you don't know for sure are the right type (e.g. value passed to `Q.eq()` should be a string, number, boolean, or null -- but not an Object. If the value comes from JSON, you must validate it before passing it!)
- Never pass column names (without whitelisting) from user input
- Values passed to `oneOf`, `notIn` should be arrays of simple types - be careful they don't contain objects
- Do not use `Q.like` / `Q.notLike` without `Q.sanitizeLikeString`
- Do not use `unsafe raw queries` without knowing what you're doing and sanitizing all user input

### Unsafe raw queries

If this Query syntax is not enough for you, and you need to get your hands dirty on a raw SQL or Loki query, you need **rawQueries**.

Please don't use this if you don't know what you're doing. The method name is called `unsafe` for a reason.

#### SQL queries

For now, only record SQL queries are available. If you need other SQL queries or LokiJS raw queries, please contribute!

```js
const records = commentCollection.unsafeFetchRecordsWithSQL('select * from comments where ...')
```

You need to be sure to properly sanitize user values to avoid SQL injection, and filter out deleted records using `where _status is not 'deleted'` clause

#### SQL/Loki expressions

You can also include smaller bits of SQL and Loki expressions so that you can still use as much of Watermelon query builder as possible:

```js
// SQL example:
postsCollection.query(
  Q.where('is_published', true),
  Q.unsafeSqlExpr('tasks.num1 not between 1 and 5'),
)

// LokiJS example:
postsCollection.query(
  Q.where('is_published', true),
  Q.unsafeLokiExpr({ text1: { $contains: 'hey' } })
)
```

For SQL, be sure to prefix column names with table name when joining with other tables.

### Multi-table column comparisons and `Q.unsafeLokiFilter`

Example: we want to query comments posted more than 14 days after the post it belongs to was published.

There's sadly no built-in syntax for this, but can be worked around using unsafe expressions like so:

```js
// SQL example:
commentsCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', 'published_at', Q.notEq(null)),
  Q.unsafeSqlExpr(`comments.createad_at > posts.published_at + ${14 * 24 * 3600 * 1000}`)
)

// LokiJS example:
commentsCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', 'published_at', Q.notEq(null)),
  Q.unsafeLokiFilter((record, loki) => {
    const post = loki.getCollection('posts').by('id', record.post_id)
    return post && record.created_at > post.published_at + 14 * 24 * 3600 * 1000
  }),
)
```

For LokiJS, remember that `record` is an unsanitized object and must not be mutated. `Q.unsafeLokiFilter` only works when using `LokiJSAdapter` with `useWebWorkers: false`

### `null` behavior

There are some gotchas you should be aware of. The `Q.gt`, `gte`, `lt`, `lte`, `oneOf`, `notIn`, `like` operators match the semantics of SQLite in terms of how they treat `null`. Those are different from JavaScript.

**Rule of thumb:** No null comparisons are allowed.

For example, if you query `comments` for `Q.where('likes', Q.lt(10))`, a comment with 8 likes and 0 likes will be included, but a comment with `null` likes will not! In Watermelon queries, `null` is not less than any number. That's why you should avoid [making table columns optional](./Schema.md) unless you actually need it.

Similarly, if you query with a column comparison, like `Q.where('likes', Q.gt(Q.column('dislikes')))`, only comments where both `likes` and `dislikes` are not null will be compared. A comment with 5 likes and `null` dislikes will NOT be included. 5 is not greater than `null` here.

**`Q.oneOf` operator**: It is not allowed to pass `null` as an argument to `Q.oneOf`. Instead of `Q.oneOf([null, 'published', 'draft'])` you need to explicitly allow `null` as a value like so:

```js
postsCollection.query(
  Q.or(
    Q.where('status', Q.oneOf(['published', 'draft'])),
    Q.where('status', null)
  )
)
```

**`Q.notIn` operator**: If you query, say, posts with `Q.where('status', Q.notIn(['published', 'draft']))`, it will match posts with a status different than `published` or `draft`, however, it will NOT match posts with `status == null`. If you want to include such posts, query for that explicitly like with the example above.

**`Q.weakGt` operator**: This is weakly typed version of `Q.gt` — one that allows null comparisons. So if you query `comments` with `Q.where('likes', Q.weakGt(Q.column('dislikes')))`, it WILL match comments with 5 likes and `null` dislikes. (For `weakGt`, unlike standard operators, any number is greater than `null`).

* * *

## Next steps

➡️ Now that you've mastered Queries, [**make more Relations**](./Relation.md)

Commit message:

clean up + query contributing guide

docs-master/Query.md, after:

# Query API

**Querying** is how you find records that match certain conditions, for example:

- Find all comments that belong to a certain post
- Find all _verified_ comments made by John
- Count all verified comments made by John or Lucy published under posts made in the last two weeks

Because queries are executed on the database, and not in JavaScript, they're really fast. It's also how Watermelon can be fast even at large scales, because even with tens of thousands of records _total_, you rarely need to load more than a few dozen records at app launch.

## Defining Queries

### @children

The simplest query is made using `@children`. This defines a `Query` for all comments that belong to a `Post`:

```js
class Post extends Model {
  // ...
  @children('comments') comments
}
```

**➡️ Learn more:** [Defining Models](./Model.md)

### Extended Query

To **narrow down** a `Query` (add [extra conditions](#query-conditions) to an existing Query), use `.extend()`:

```js
import { children, lazy } from '@nozbe/watermelondb/decorators'

class Post extends Model {
  // ...
  @children('comments') comments
  @lazy verifiedComments = this.comments.extend(Q.where('is_verified', true))
  @lazy verifiedAwesomeComments = this.verifiedComments.extend(Q.where('is_awesome', true))
}
```

**Note:** Use the `@lazy` when extending or defining new Queries for performance

### Custom Queries

You can query any table using `this.collections.get(tableName).query(conditions)`. Here, `post.comments` will query all users that made a comment under `post`.

```js
class Post extends Model {
  // ...
  @lazy commenters = this.collections.get('users').query(
    Q.on('comments', 'post_id', this.id)
  )
}
```

## Executing Queries

Most of the time, you [connect Queries to Components](./Components.md) by using `observe` or `observeCount`:

```js
withObservables(['post'], ({ post }) => ({
  post: post.observe(),
  comments: post.comments.observe(),
  verifiedCommentCount: post.verifiedComments.observeCount(),
}))
```

#### Fetch

To simply get the current list or current count, use `fetch` / `fetchCount`. You might need it [in Actions](./Actions.md).

```js
const comments = await post.comments.fetch()
const verifiedCommentCount = await post.verifiedComments.fetchCount()

// Shortcut syntax:
const comments = await post.comments
const verifiedCommentCount = await post.verifiedComments.count
```

## Query conditions

```js
import { Q } from '@nozbe/watermelondb'
// ...
commentCollection.query(
  Q.where('is_verified', true)
)
```

This will query **all** comments that are verified (all comments with one condition: the `is_verified` column of a comment must be `true`).

When making conditions, you refer to [**column names**](./Schema.md) of a table (i.e. `is_verified`, not `isVerified`). This is because queries are executed directly on the underlying database.

The second argument is the value we want to query for. Note that the passed argument must be the same type as the column (`string`, `number`, or `boolean`; `null` is allowed only if the column is marked as `isOptional: true` in the schema).

#### Empty query

```js
const allComments = await commentCollection.query().fetch()
```

A Query with no conditions will find **all** records in the collection.

**Note:** Don't do this unless necessary. It's generally more efficient to only query the exact records you need.

#### Multiple conditions

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.where('is_verified', true),
  Q.where('is_awesome', true)
)
```

This queries all comments that are **both** verified **and** awesome.

### Conditions with other operators

| Query | JavaScript equivalent |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| `Q.where('is_verified', true)` | `is_verified === true` (shortcut syntax) |
| `Q.where('is_verified', Q.eq(true))` | `is_verified === true` |
| `Q.where('archived_at', Q.notEq(null))` | `archived_at !== null` |
| `Q.where('likes', Q.gt(0))` | `likes > 0`  |
| `Q.where('likes', Q.weakGt(0))` | `likes > 0` (slightly different semantics — [see "null behavior"](#null-behavior) for details) |
| `Q.where('likes', Q.gte(100))` | `likes >= 100` |
| `Q.where('dislikes', Q.lt(100))` | `dislikes < 100` |
| `Q.where('dislikes', Q.lte(100))` | `dislikes <= 100` |
| `Q.where('likes', Q.between(10, 100))` | `likes >= 10 && likes <= 100` |
| `Q.where('status', Q.oneOf(['published', 'draft']))` | `status === 'published' \|\| status === 'draft'` |
| `Q.where('status', Q.notIn(['archived', 'deleted']))` | `status !== 'archived' && status !== 'deleted'` |
| `Q.where('status', Q.like('%bl_sh%'))` | `/.*bl.sh.*/i` (See note below!) |
| `Q.where('status', Q.notLike('%bl_sh%'))` | `/^((!?.*bl.sh.*).)*$/i` (Inverse regex match) (See note below!) |

**Note:** It's NOT SAFE to use `Q.like` and `Q.notLike` with user input directly, because special characters like `%` or `_` are not escaped. Always sanitize user input like so:
```js
Q.like(`%${Q.sanitizeLikeString(userInput)}%`)
Q.notLike(`%${Q.sanitizeLikeString(userInput)}%`)
```

You can use `Q.like` for search-related tasks. For example, to find all users whose username start with "jas" (case-insensitive) you can write

```js
usersCollection.query(
  Q.where("username", Q.like(`${Q.sanitizeLikeString("jas")}%`)
)
```

where `"jas"` can be changed dynamically with user input.

### AND/OR nesting

You can nest multiple conditions using `Q.and` and `Q.or`:

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.where('archived_at', Q.notEq(null)),
  Q.or(
    Q.where('is_verified', true),
    Q.and(
      Q.where('likes', Q.gt(10)),
      Q.where('dislikes', Q.lt(5))
    )
  )
)
```

This is equivalent to `archivedAt !== null && (isVerified || (likes > 10 && dislikes < 5))`.

### Conditions on related tables ("JOIN queries")

For example: query all comments under posts published by John:

```js
// Shortcut syntax:
commentCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', 'author_id', john.id),
)

// Full syntax:
commentCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', Q.where('author_id', john.id)),
)
```

Normally you set conditions on the table you're querying. Here we're querying **comments**, but we have a condition on the **post** the comment belongs to.

The first argument for `Q.on` is the table name you're making a condition on. The other two arguments are same as for `Q.where`.

**Note:** The two tables [must be associated](./Model.md) before you can use `Q.on`.

#### Multiple conditions on a related table

For example: query all comments under posts that are written by John *and* are either published or belong to `draftBlog`

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', [
    Q.where('author_id', john.id)
    Q.or(
      Q.where('published', true),
      Q.where('blog_id', draftBlog.id),
    )
  ]),
)
```

Instead of an array of conditions, you can also pass `Q.and`, `Q.or`, `Q.where`, or `Q.on` as the second argument to `Q.on`.

#### Nesting `Q.on` within AND/OR

If you want to place `Q.on` nested within `Q.and` and `Q.or`, you must explicitly define all tables you're joining on. (NOTE: The `Q.experimentalJoinTables` API is subject to change)

```js
tasksCollection.query(
  Q.experimentalJoinTables(['projects']),
  Q.or(
    Q.where('is_followed', true),
    Q.on('projects', 'is_followed', true),
  ),
)
```

Known limitation: column comparisons do not work within nested `Q.on`s on LokiJSAdapter

#### Deep `Q.on`s

You can also nest `Q.on` within `Q.on`, e.g. to make a condition on a grandparent. You must explicitly define the tables you're joining on. (NOTE: The `Q.experimentalNestedJoin` API is subject to change). Multiple levels of nesting are allowed.

```js
// this queries tasks that are inside projects that are inside teams where team.foo == 'bar'
tasksCollection.query(
  Q.experimentalNestedJoin('projects', 'teams'),
  Q.on('projects', Q.on('teams', 'foo', 'bar')),
)
```

## Advanced Queries

### Advanced observing

Call `query.observeWithColumns(['foo', 'bar'])` to create an Observable that emits a value not only when the list of matching records changes (new records/deleted records), but also when any of the matched records changes its `foo` or `bar` column. [Use this for observing sorted lists](./Components.md)

#### Count throttling

By default, calling `query.observeCount()` returns an Observable that is throttled to emit at most once every 250ms. You can disable throttling using `query.observeCount(false)`.

### Column comparisons

This queries comments that have more likes than dislikes. Note that we're comparing `likes` column to another column instead of a value.

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.where('likes', Q.gt(Q.column('dislikes')))
)
```

### sortBy, take, skip

When using SQLite adapter, you can use these *experimental* clauses to sort the result of the query and to limit the number of results

```js
commentCollection.query(
  Q.experimentalSortBy('likes', Q.asc), // sorts ascending by `likes`
  Q.experimentalSkip(100),
  Q.experimentalTake(100),
)
```

**NOTE**: This does not currently work on web/LokiJS (please contribute!), and causes query observation to fall back to a less efficient method. We recommend using sortBy only when you absolutely need to limit queries, otherwise, it may be better to sort in JavaScript.

### Security

Remember that Queries are a sensitive subject, security-wise. Never trust user input and pass it directly into queries. In particular:

- Never pass into queries values you don't know for sure are the right type (e.g. value passed to `Q.eq()` should be a string, number, boolean, or null -- but not an Object. If the value comes from JSON, you must validate it before passing it!)
- Never pass column names (without whitelisting) from user input
- Values passed to `oneOf`, `notIn` should be arrays of simple types - be careful they don't contain objects
- Do not use `Q.like` / `Q.notLike` without `Q.sanitizeLikeString`
- Do not use `unsafe raw queries` without knowing what you're doing and sanitizing all user input

### Unsafe raw queries

If this Query syntax is not enough for you, and you need to get your hands dirty on a raw SQL or Loki query, you need **rawQueries**.

Please don't use this if you don't know what you're doing. The method name is called `unsafe` for a reason.

#### SQL queries

For now, only record SQL queries are available. If you need other SQL queries or LokiJS raw queries, please contribute!

```js
const records = commentCollection.unsafeFetchRecordsWithSQL('select * from comments where ...')
```

You need to be sure to properly sanitize user values to avoid SQL injection, and filter out deleted records using `where _status is not 'deleted'` clause

#### SQL/Loki expressions

You can also include smaller bits of SQL and Loki expressions so that you can still use as much of Watermelon query builder as possible:

```js
// SQL example:
postsCollection.query(
  Q.where('is_published', true),
  Q.unsafeSqlExpr('tasks.num1 not between 1 and 5'),
)

// LokiJS example:
postsCollection.query(
  Q.where('is_published', true),
  Q.unsafeLokiExpr({ text1: { $contains: 'hey' } })
)
```

For SQL, be sure to prefix column names with table name when joining with other tables.

### Multi-table column comparisons and `Q.unsafeLokiFilter`

Example: we want to query comments posted more than 14 days after the post it belongs to was published.

There's sadly no built-in syntax for this, but can be worked around using unsafe expressions like so:

```js
// SQL example:
commentsCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', 'published_at', Q.notEq(null)),
  Q.unsafeSqlExpr(`comments.createad_at > posts.published_at + ${14 * 24 * 3600 * 1000}`)
)

// LokiJS example:
commentsCollection.query(
  Q.on('posts', 'published_at', Q.notEq(null)),
  Q.unsafeLokiFilter((record, loki) => {
    const post = loki.getCollection('posts').by('id', record.post_id)
    return post && record.created_at > post.published_at + 14 * 24 * 3600 * 1000
  }),
)
```

For LokiJS, remember that `record` is an unsanitized object and must not be mutated. `Q.unsafeLokiFilter` only works when using `LokiJSAdapter` with `useWebWorkers: false`. There can only be one `Q.unsafeLokiFilter` clause per query.

### `null` behavior

There are some gotchas you should be aware of. The `Q.gt`, `gte`, `lt`, `lte`, `oneOf`, `notIn`, `like` operators match the semantics of SQLite in terms of how they treat `null`. Those are different from JavaScript.

**Rule of thumb:** No null comparisons are allowed.

For example, if you query `comments` for `Q.where('likes', Q.lt(10))`, a comment with 8 likes and 0 likes will be included, but a comment with `null` likes will not! In Watermelon queries, `null` is not less than any number. That's why you should avoid [making table columns optional](./Schema.md) unless you actually need it.

Similarly, if you query with a column comparison, like `Q.where('likes', Q.gt(Q.column('dislikes')))`, only comments where both `likes` and `dislikes` are not null will be compared. A comment with 5 likes and `null` dislikes will NOT be included. 5 is not greater than `null` here.

**`Q.oneOf` operator**: It is not allowed to pass `null` as an argument to `Q.oneOf`. Instead of `Q.oneOf([null, 'published', 'draft'])` you need to explicitly allow `null` as a value like so:

```js
postsCollection.query(
  Q.or(
    Q.where('status', Q.oneOf(['published', 'draft'])),
    Q.where('status', null)
  )
)
```

**`Q.notIn` operator**: If you query, say, posts with `Q.where('status', Q.notIn(['published', 'draft']))`, it will match posts with a status different than `published` or `draft`, however, it will NOT match posts with `status == null`. If you want to include such posts, query for that explicitly like with the example above.

**`Q.weakGt` operator**: This is weakly typed version of `Q.gt` — one that allows null comparisons. So if you query `comments` with `Q.where('likes', Q.weakGt(Q.column('dislikes')))`, it WILL match comments with 5 likes and `null` dislikes. (For `weakGt`, unlike standard operators, any number is greater than `null`).

## Contributing improvements to Watermelon query language

Here are files that are relevant. This list may look daunting, but adding new matchers is actually quite simple and multiple first-time contributors made these improvements (including like, sort, take, skip). The implementation is just split into multiple files (and their test files), but when you look at them, it'll be easy to add matchers by analogy.

We recommend starting from writing tests first to check expected behavior, then implement the actual behavior.

- `src/QueryDescription/test.js` - Test clause builder (`Q.myThing`) output and test that it rejects bad/unsafe parameters
- `src/QueryDescription/index.js` - Add clause builder and type definition
- `src/__tests__/databaseTests.js` - Add test ("join" if it requires conditions on related tables; "match" otherwise) that checks that the new clause matches expected records. From this, tests running against SQLite, LokiJS, and Matcher are generated. (If one of those is not supported, add `skip{Loki,Sql,Count,Matcher}: true` to your test)
- `src/adapters/sqlite/encodeQuery/test.js` - Test that your query generates SQL you expect. (If your clause is Loki-only, test that error is thrown)
- `src/adapters/sqlite/encodeQuery/index.js` - Generate SQL
- `src/adapters/lokijs/worker/encodeQuery/test.js` - Test that your query generates the Loki query you expect (If your clause is SQLite-only, test that an error is thrown)
- `src/adapters/lokijs/worker/encodeQuery/index.js` - Generate Loki query
- `src/adapters/lokijs/worker/{performJoins/*.js,executeQuery.js}` - May be relevant for some Loki queries, but most likely you don't need to look here.
- `src/observation/encodeMatcher/` - If your query can be checked against a record in JavaScript (e.g. you're adding new "by regex" matcher), implement this behavior here (`index.js`, `operators.js`). This is used for efficient "simple observation". You don't need to write tests - `databaseTests` are used automatically. If you can't or won't implement encodeMatcher for your query, add a check to `canEncode.js` so that it returns `false` for your query (Less efficient "reloading observation" will be used then). Add your query to `test.js`'s "unencodable queries" then.

* * *

## Next steps

➡️ Now that you've mastered Queries, [**make more Relations**](./Relation.md)
